= rats

a.k.a. Ruby Alberta Township System

A ruby class to help with using the Alberta Township System.  This class will allow
you to create and represent townships, sections and quarter sections.

You may find it amusing that Alberta is Rat-free ... until now.

== ATS

Alberta Township system is a land survey grid used in Alberta, Canada that
divides the whole province into addressable locations.

A typical location looks like: NE 1-2-3 W4

Which can be broken down as follows ...

=== Meridian

from above example: [= W4] or West of the 4th Meridian

The Meridian is a constant line running perpendicular to the line of longitude,
and increments approx. every 4th line of longitude, from East to West.

Alberta contains 3 of these Meridians, W4 through W6.

=== Range
a.k.a Range Lines

from above example: [= 3]

The Range is the x-axis within the given Meridian.  It increases East to West and
resets at the next Meridian.  Each increase is approx. every 6 miles.

NOTE: The longitude lines are closer together the further North you get, so as
you go North, there is less Ranges from East to West.

=== Township
a.k.a. Township Lines

from above example: [= 2]

The Township is the y-axis within the Meridian.  It increases South to North and
never resets, running from the Alberta-US border to the Northern border of Alberta.
Each increase is approx. every 6 miles.

NOTE: The 6x6 mile "square" indicated by the Township (line) + Range (line) +
Meridian is confusingly called a Township.  So you have the Township line and
the 6x6 mile Township "square".

=== Section

from above example: [= 1]

The Section represents a 1x1 mile "square" within the 6x6 mile Township.
There can be up to a maximum of 36 Sections in a township.  The number starts with
1 in the South-East corner and travels West to number 6.  It then increases to 7
North of number 6 and counts up West-to-East until the number 12.  It snakes back
and forth until it finishes at number 36 in the North-East corner.

=== Multi
a.k.a. Multi Quarters

from above example: [= N or = North]

The Half Section represents a 1/2 x 1 mile area within the 1x1 mile Section.
They are identified by "N", "E", "S" and "W".

from above example: [= NSE]

The Multi Quarter Section represents a 1/2 x 1 mile + 1/2 x 1/2 mile area within the
1x1 mile Section (or basically 3 of the 4 quarters).
They are identified by "NSE", "NSW", "ENW", "ESW", "SNE", "SNW", "WNE" and "WSE".

=== Quarter
a.k.a. Quarter Section

from above example: [= NE]

The Quarter represents a 1/2 x 1/2 mile square within the 1x1 mile Section.
There can be 4 Quarters in a Section.  They are identified by "NE", "NW", "SE"
and "SW".

== Purpose

The purpose of Rats is to make it easier to deal with location described using
the Alberta Township System, at the Quarter, Section or Township level.

=== Validation

Included is validations, only allowing you to describe locations that actually
exist.

For example, Range-line 30 is valid for Township-lines 1-18, but not 18-126.

NOTE: At the moment, invalid quarters within valid sections are not currently
identified.

=== Parsing

Included is string parsing, allowing you to extract and separate the different
fields from multiple string representations of the location.

For example, NE 1-2-3 W4 and 40300201NE are both recognized and parsed, representing
the same location.

=== Expansion/Division

Townships, Sections and Half Sections can be divided into multiple Quarter Sections.
1 Half Section = 2 Quarter Sections
1 Multi Quarter Section = 2-3 Quarter Sections
1 Section = 4 Quarter Sections
1 Township = 144 Quarter Sections

For example, the Half Section N 1-2-3 W4 has the Quarter Sections NE 1-2-3 W4 and
NW 1-2-3 W4.

=== Display

Included is string creation that can create common representations of the
location.

= Usage

Parse a location

  quarter_section = Rats.new("NE 1-2-3 W4")

Print the location

  quarter_section.location
  quarter_section.location(:padded)
  quarter_section.location(:short)
  quarter_section.location(:long)

Read the attributes

  quarter_section.quarter
  quarter_section.section
  quarter_section.township
  quarter_section.range
  quarter_section.meridian
  
Divide into multiple Quarter Sections

  half_section = Rats.new("N 1-2-3 W4")
  half_section.is_divisible?
  quarter_sections = half_section.divide
  # quarter_sections == [Rats.new("NE 1-2-3 W4"), Rats.new("NW 1-2-3 W4")]

  multi_section = Rats.new("NSE 1-2-3 W4")
  multi_section.is_divisible?
  quarter_sections = multi_section.divide
  # quarter_sections == [Rats.new("NE 1-2-3 W4"), Rats.new("NW 1-2-3 W4"), Rats.new("SE 1-2-3 W4")]

= Information

== links

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alberta_Township_System

== Road Map

Future:
- either correct the assumption that all quarters are valid in a valid
  section, or remove validation completely (re: all or none)
- add support for Saskatchewan (no timeline, need to find data)
- address bugs, if any

Except for the above, once this gem is finalized, I do not see future
development happening unless I want to add ATS to other-system conversions
(ie: latitude/longitude).  Nothing else is planned.

Currently this point has not been reached and this gem is still in development.

== Assumptions

As currently written, I assume that within every valid section, all four quarters
are valid. I know this to be incorrect, but I can not correct this until I know which
cases this assumption breaks down.

== Environment

This gem was created using:
- ruby 1.9.1-p378, 1.9.2-p0
- rspec 1.3.0
- rake 0.8.7

== Note on Patches/Pull Requests
 
* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history.
  (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself I can ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 Mark sG. See LICENSE for details.
